---
layout: post
title: New to this Blog?
date: 2024-12-15 16:40:16
description: Start from here! 👋
categories: Blog
featured: true
giscus_comments: true
---

## Greetings!
Welcome to my digital garden, where I grow my thoughts! This blog covers a variety of topics, and this post serves as a short guide to help you navigate the different sections. I use categories and tags to organize everything.

To see *all* the posts within a specific category, please click on the links mentioned in the descriptions below. Here's a breakdown of the main sections, with a couple of specific post examples linked within each description to give you a taste:

---
### Hashtags
Beyond the main categories, I use specific topic tags. Most of the posts are currently in the [AI](/blog/tag/ai), but there are some notable [Life](/blog/tag/life/) catagories featuring posts showing my other interests such as [Blade Runner](/blog/2025/Blade-Runner-2049/). More tags soon to come!

### Thoughts
This section contains my unfiltered ideas, recorded more freely than polished blog posts. You can browse all entries in the **[Thoughts](/blog/category/thoughts)** category to explore concepts as they come to me, offering a different kind of value. You'll find pieces like explorations on whether [Fast AI Takeoffs Are Possible?](/blog/2025/takeoff/) or thoughts on AI companions like [Samantha is here](/blog/2025/ai-girlfriend/).

### Paper
In the **[Paper](/blog/category/paper)** category, I summarize and discuss findings from academic papers I've read. It's where I digest and share insights from research, such as reviews on the [Scaling Laws](/blog/2025/Scaling-Laws/), [VAE](/blog/2025/VAE/), or even philosophical ones like [Palatable Conceptions of Disembodied Being](/blog/2025/mind/). Lots of papers piling up!

### Blog
This is where you'll find my more polished writing. Posts in the **[Blog](/blog/category/blog/)** category are pieces where I've spent time clearly articulating and proofreading my thoughts, aiming for proper blog articles. Examples include reflections on development styles like [Vibe Coding](/blog/2025/vibe-coding/) or deeper questions like [Do LLMs Possess an Internal State of Mind?](https://medium.com/@FdForThought/do-llms-possess-an-internal-state-of-mind-20329217f124).

### Links
The **[Links](/blog/category/link)** category serves as an archive of articles, videos, and other resources I've found insightful and want to share. It's a collection of things I've consumed and found valuable, like the link collections from [March 2025](/blog/2025/Link-Archive-Mar-2025/) or [February 2025](/blog/2025/Link-Archive-Feb-2025/).

---
<br />
Using these categories and tags, I hope you can easily find the topics that interest you most. Enjoy exploring the garden and the food for thought within!